I’ve decided to take a break from teaching next semester. This decision was a surprisingly difficult one to arrive at, especially when considering that teaching represents a significant expenditure of effort for me while also contributing a small percentage of my household income. In financial terms dropping my teaching commitments altogether seems like a no-brainer, and yet I found myself agonizing over the decision to take a short break for the better part of three months before finally letting my department know not to schedule me next term. 

It’s likely clear from my blog, and the syllabi I share on this site, and also my [recent publication on anti-dehumanization pedagogy](/docs/pubs/proof_anti-dehumanization-pedagogy.pdf), that I love teaching (and talking about teaching). I genuinely believe I am good at teaching, and it gives me a tremendous amount of fulfillment to work with students. It’s not an exaggeration to say that through multiple failures and stressful moments in my research career, teaching has represented a saving grace for me. I live for the moments where I see the light turn on behind a student’s eyes while talking about any one of my interests (communication theory, media studies, and public health \- if you’re new here). 

But this past year was a tough one for me. I had a number of victories for sure: I passed my qualifying exams and dissertation proposal defense, won a summer research grant and presented at a conference on the resultant work, and had a couple publications go through after years of development, revision, and resubmissions. But I found myself more disconnected from my partner and friends and my own body than ever before. 

Teaching at two institutions while maintaining research activities (both independently and as a staff researcher) required me to bounce around town \- spending the morning at one place, an afternoon in another, and my evenings in yet one more before finally driving across the bridge back to my home. My wife and cat began to expect my presence less and less, both physically and mentally. I often didn’t have the time to pack a nutritious lunch and had to rely on eating out for many of my meals. I lived in a constant (and admittedly self-inflicted) scheduling nightmare, where my office hours needed to not conflict with research meetings, which needed to not conflict with check-ins with committee members and mentors, which needed to not conflict with lunch, or my travel time, or hygiene breaks (i.e. “taking a leak”). 

I obviously lived an unsustainable life this past year, and I made it worse by diving into the wonderful world of homeownership, which entailed countless contractor meetings and figuring out which broken appliance was responsible for the noises that went bump in the night. It only became apparent to me just how many ends the candle was burning at when we experienced an unexpected family tragedy. Without giving too many details, there was a moment where I realized that the gloomy morning I spent in the emergency room was actually the least stressed I had been in months, because the only thing I could do there was wait and answer the nurses’ questions. 

I took bereavement leave from two of the institutions I was affiliated with that day, but felt compelled to go teach an evening class on the second day because it was the first day of that class. I told myself, and my wife, that I loved teaching this class in previous terms, and that it would do me some good to spend time with a roomful of motivated and engaged students. I was right in some ways too \- I did find teaching that evening to be comforting in a way. That class session was a reminder that both the content and style of my teaching was a service I rendered out of love to my discipline and to the idea that good education is a civic benefit. But in the coming weeks, I started questioning whether I had appropriate boundaries between myself and my identity as a teacher. 

In a previous blog, I shared how personally upset I was after I caught a student using generative AI to complete a writing assignment. Is that a normal reaction? If I attempt to approach the concept of liberal arts education completely dispassionately (which is a real challenge for me), we teachers are engaged in the act of building familiarity with various subjects within our students with the goal of motivating them to become deeply-thinking citizens who can apply a well-rounded understanding of the world to any series of novel or ambiguous problems in their personal or professional lives. But most people likely don’t see education as being a social good in the same way. Sure, a randomly selected person may agree that a well-educated public is good for society, but they may cite the need for a well-trained workforce over the need for a critically thinking citizenry when thinking about higher education. 

If I am in the publicly perceived role of training a workforce, then maybe I shouldn’t take it so personally when my students don’t live up to my standards. And also when I can’t live up to my own standard \- maybe I should feel more comfortable cancelling class when I’m not ok. Maybe, like with most jobs, the responsibility lies with institutions, who should ensure redundancies so I can call out sick without being responsible for scheduling another professor to take over my class and preparing a lesson plan for them. It is only when I think of teaching as being a literal fight for the soul of a democratic society that it takes on personal meaning, and so maybe that high-minded position is actually poisonous to a dispassionate view of teaching as “just another job.” 

At least that’s how I’d like to think. But I can’t, because I remain overly ambitious and optimistic with my approach to teaching. I still think that the true role of a teacher, especially in the liberal arts model, is to help students build the muscles needed for effective citizenship \- collecting and evaluating evidence, having focused and rigorous debates, and connecting multiple disciplines to understand topics at a deeper level. And especially when considering the state of American society today, building these skills takes on an even more urgent meaning than ever before.  

And that’s exactly why I need to take a break from both the physical and emotional labor of teaching, at least for a little while. To be a good educator requires, in my opinion, a wholehearted giving of oneself to the craft of pedagogy. It’s not enough to know your subject and be able to fluently explain it to a crowd \- you have to put in the emotional work of connecting with your students and exciting them, while remembering (if you’re a Freirian like me at least) that the education you participate in should empower students to build their own liberation, whatever that might mean for them. And that kind of work just can’t come from an empty cup like mine is right now.

